



QUIC                                                    B. Trammell, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                               P. De Vaere
Intended status: Informational                                ETH Zurich
Expires: May 31, 2018                                            R. Even
                                                                  Huawei
                                                             G. Fioccola
                                                          Telecom Italia
                                                              T. Fossati
                                                                   Nokia
                                                                M. Ihlar
                                                                Ericsson
                                                               A. Morton
                                                                    AT&T
                                                              E. Stephan
                                                                  Orange
                                                       November 27, 2017


       The Addition of a Spin Bit to the QUIC Transport Protocol
                    draft-trammell-quic-spin-latest

Abstract

   This document summarizes work to date on the addition of a "spin
   bit", intended for explicit measurability of end-to-end RTT on QUIC
   flows.  It proposes a detailed mechanism for the spin bit, describes
   how to use it to measure end-to-end latency, discusses corner cases
   and workarounds therefor in the measurement, describes experimental
   evaluation of the mechanism done to date, and examines the utility
   and privacy implications of the spin bit.  As the overhead and risk
   associated with the spin bit are negligible, and the utility of a
   passive RTT measurement signal at higher resolution than once per
   flow is clear, this document advocates for the addition of the spin
   bit to the protocol.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any




Trammell, et al.          Expires May 31, 2018                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  Spin Bit                   November 2017


   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 31, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  The Spin Bit Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Using the Spin Bit for Passive RTT Measurement  . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Limitations and Workarounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Alternate RTT Measurement Approaches for Diagnosing QUIC
           flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.3.  Experimental Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Use Cases for Passive RTT Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Privacy and Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: Brian to write frontmatter.  Why we care, why this
   draft exists.]

2.  The Spin Bit Mechanism

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: Marcus to write.  Modify slightly from PR609 design,
   spin only on short header packets.  Coordinate with work on reserved
   bits in the short header in the transport draft?]






Trammell, et al.          Expires May 31, 2018                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  Spin Bit                   November 2017


3.  Using the Spin Bit for Passive RTT Measurement

   When a QUIC flow is sending at full rate (i.e., neither application
   nor flow control limited), the latency spin bit in each direction
   changes value once per round-trip time (RTT).  An on-path observer
   can observe the time difference between edges in the spin bit signal
   to measure one sample of end-to-end RTT.  Note that this measurement,
   as with passive RTT measurement for TCP, includes any transport
   protocol delay (e.g., delayed sending of acknowledgements) and/or
   application layer delay (e.g., waiting for a request to complete).
   It therefore provides devices on path a good instantaneous estimate
   of the RTT as experienced by the application.  A simple linear
   smoothing or moving minimum filter can be applied to the stream of
   RTT information to get a more stable estimate.

3.1.  Limitations and Workarounds

   The spin bit provides latency information only when the sender is
   neither application nor flow control limited.  When the sender is
   application-limited by periodic application traffic, where that
   period is longer than the RTT, measuring the spin bit provides
   information about the application period, not the RTT.  Simple
   heuristics based on the observed data rate per flow or changes in the
   RTT series can be used to reject bad RTT samples due to application
   or flow control limitation.  [EDITOR'S NOTE: more here?]

   Since the spin bit logic at each endpoint considers only samples on
   packets that advance the highest packet number seen, signal
   generation itself is resistent to reordering.  However, reordering
   can cause problems at an observer by causing spurious edge detection
   and therefore low RTT estimates.  This can be probabilistically
   mitigated by the observer considering the low-order bits of the
   packet number, and rejecting edges that appear out-of-order.

3.2.  Alternate RTT Measurement Approaches for Diagnosing QUIC flows

   There are two alternatives to explicit signaling for passive RTT
   measurement for measuring the RTT experienced by QUIC flows.

   The first of these is handshake RTT measurement.  As described in
   [QUIC-MGT], the packets of the QUIC handshake are distinguishable on
   the wire in such a way that they can be used for one RTT measurement
   sample per flow: the delay between the client initial and the server
   cleartext packet can be used to measure "upstream" RTT (between the
   observer and the server), and the delay between the server cleartext
   packet and the next client cleartext packet can be used to measure
   "downstream" RTT (between the client and the observer).  When RTT
   measurements are used in large aggregates (all flows traversing a



Trammell, et al.          Expires May 31, 2018                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  Spin Bit                   November 2017


   large link, for example), a methodology based on handshake RTT could
   be used to generate sufficient samples for some use cases (e.g.
   [EDITOR'S NOTE: cite use cases here]) without the spin bit.  However,
   this methodology would rely on the assumption that the difference
   between handshake RTT and nominal in-flow RTT is negligible.
   Specifically, (1) any additional delay required to compute any
   cryptographic parameters must be negligible with respect to network
   RTT; (2) any additional delay required to establish state along the
   path must be negligible with respect to network RTT; and (3) network
   treatment of initial packets in a flow must identical to that of
   later packets in the flow.  When these assumptions cannot be shown to
   hold, spin-bit based RTT measurement is preferable to handshake RTT
   measurement, even for applications for which handshake RTT
   measurement would otherwise be suitable.

   The second alternative is parallel active measurement: using ICMP
   Echo Request and Reply [RFC0792] [RFC4433], a dedicated measurement
   protocol like TWAMP [RFC5357], or a separate diagnostic QUIC flow to
   measure RTT.  Regardless of protocol, the active measurement must be
   initiated by a client on the same network as the client of the QUIC
   flow(s) of interest, or a network close by in the Internet topology,
   toward the server.  Note that there is no guarantee that ICMP flows
   will receive the same network treatment as the flows under study,
   both due to differential treatment of ICMP traffic and due to ECMP
   routing (see e.g.  [TOKYO-PING]).  TWAMP and QUIC diagnostic flows,
   though both use UDP, have similar issues regarding ECMP.  However, in
   situations where the entity doing the measurement can guarantee that
   the active measurement traffic will traverse the subpaths of interest
   (e.g.  residential access network measurement under a network
   architecture and business model where the network operator owns the
   CPE), active measurement can be used to generate RTT samples at the
   cost of at least two non-productive packets sent though the network
   per sample.

3.3.  Experimental Evaluation

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: Summary of Piet's work to date goes here.]

4.  Use Cases for Passive RTT Measurement

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: Roni on video]

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: Emile on interdomain]

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: Markus on AQM?]

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: Others?]




Trammell, et al.          Expires May 31, 2018                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  Spin Bit                   November 2017


5.  Privacy and Security Considerations

   The privacy considerations for the latency spin bit are essentially
   the same as those for passive RTT measurement in general.

   A concern was raised during the discussion of this feature within the
   QUIC working group and the QUIC RTT Design Team that high-resolution
   RTT information might be usable for geolocation.  However, an
   evaluation based on RTT samples taken over 13,780 paths in the
   Internet from RIPE Atlas anchoring measurements [TRILAT] shows that
   the magnitude and uncertainty of RTT data render the resolution of
   geolocation information that can be derived from Internet RTT is
   limited to national- or continental-scale; i.e., less resolution than
   is generally available from free, open IP geolocation databases.
   Therefore, in the general case, when an endpoint's IP address is
   known, RTT information provides negligible additional information.

   RTT information may be used to infer the occupancy of queues along a
   path; indeed, this is part of its utility for performance measurement
   and diagnostics.  When a link on given path has excessive buffering
   (on the order of hundreds of milliseconds or more; a situation
   colloquially referred to as "bufferbloat"), such that the difference
   in delay between an empty queue and a full queue dwarfs normal
   variance and RTT along the path, RTT variance during the lifetime of
   a flow can be used to infer the presence of traffic on the bottleneck
   link.  In practice, however, this is not a concern for passive
   measurement of congestion-controlled traffic, since any observer in a
   situation to observe RTT passively need not infer the presence of the
   traffic, as it can observe it directly.

   In addition, since RTT information contains application as well as
   network delay, patterns in RTT variance from minimum, and therefore
   application delay, can be used to infer or fingerprint application-
   layer behavior.  However, as with the case above, this is not a
   concern with passive measurement, since the packet size and
   interarrival time sequence, which is also directly observable,
   carries more information than RTT variance sequence.

   We therefore conclude that the high-resolution, per-flow exposure of
   RTT for passive measurement as provided by the spin bit poses
   negligible marginal risk to privacy.

   As shown in Section 2, the spin bit can be implemented separately
   from the rest of the mechanisms of the QUIC transport protocol, as it
   requires no access to any state other than that observable in the
   QUIC packet header itself.  We recommend that implementations take
   advantage of this property, to reduce the risk that a errors in the




Trammell, et al.          Expires May 31, 2018                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  Spin Bit                   November 2017


   implementation could leak private transport protocol state through
   the spin bit.

6.  Acknowledgments

   Many thanks to Christian Huitema, who originally proposed the spin
   bit as pull request 609 on draft-ietf-quic-transport.  Thanks to the
   QUIC RTT Design Team for discussions leading especially to the
   measurement limitations and privacy and security considerations
   sections.

   This work is partially supported by the European Commission under
   Horizon 2020 grant agreement no. 688421 Measurement and Architecture
   for a Middleboxed Internet (MAMI), and by the Swiss State Secretariat
   for Education, Research, and Innovation under contract no. 15.0268.
   This support does not imply endorsement.

7.  Informative References

   [QUIC-MGT]
              Kuehlewind, M. and B. Trammell, "Manageability of the QUIC
              Transport Protocol", draft-ietf-quic-manageability-01
              (work in progress), October 2017.

   [RFC0792]  Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol", STD 5,
              RFC 792, DOI 10.17487/RFC0792, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc792>.

   [RFC4433]  Kulkarni, M., Patel, A., and K. Leung, "Mobile IPv4
              Dynamic Home Agent (HA) Assignment", RFC 4433,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4433, March 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4433>.

   [RFC5357]  Hedayat, K., Krzanowski, R., Morton, A., Yum, K., and J.
              Babiarz, "A Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol (TWAMP)",
              RFC 5357, DOI 10.17487/RFC5357, October 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5357>.

   [TOKYO-PING]
              Pelsser, C., Cittadini, L., Vissicchio, S., and R. Bush,
              "From Paris to Tokyo - On the Suitability of ping to
              Measure Latency (ACM IMC 2014)", October 2014.

   [TRILAT]   Trammell, B., "On the Suitability of RTT Measurements for
              Geolocation
              (https://github.com/britram/trilateration/blob/paper-rev-
              1/paper.ipynb)", August 2017.




Trammell, et al.          Expires May 31, 2018                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  Spin Bit                   November 2017


Authors' Addresses

   Brian Trammell (editor)
   ETH Zurich

   Email: ietf@trammell.ch


   Piet De Vaere
   ETH Zurich

   Email: piet@devae.re


   Roni Even
   Huawei

   Email: roni.even@huawei.com


   Giuseppe Fioccola
   Telecom Italia

   Email: giuseppe.fioccola@telecomitalia.it


   Thomas Fossati
   Nokia

   Email: thomas.fossati@nokia.com


   Markus Ihlar
   Ericsson

   Email: marcus.ihlar@ericsson.com


   Al Morton
   AT&T

   Email: acmorton@att.com


   Emile Stephan
   Orange

   Email: emile.stephan@orange.com



Trammell, et al.          Expires May 31, 2018                  [Page 7]
